[Docs] Storage docs rewrite (#3162)
skypilot-org/skypilot: docs/source/reference/storage.rst

Reviewer: Note "object storage" is the more common term than "object stores". Replace throughout?

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: Changed to `object storage` (to refer to architecture) and `bucket`(to refer to instances).

.. _sky-storage:

> Accessing Object Stores

Reviewer: Cloud Object Storage / Cloud Buckets?

Reviewer 2: +1 for this as well. Would it be possible to do `Cloud Buckets (Object Storage)`?

Author: Changed to `Using Object Storages`

=======================

SkyPilot tasks can access data from cloud object stores such as AWS S3, Google Cloud Storage (GCS), Cloudflare R2 or IBM COS.

> These objects are made available to the task at a local path on the remote VM, so
> the task can access these objects as if they were local files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Buckets are made available to each task at a local path on the remote VM, so
the task can access bucket objects as if they were local files.
```

Usage
-----

Object stores are specified using the :code:`file_mounts` field in a SkyPilot task.

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: Use existing bucket
        :sync: existing-bucket-tab

        To access a bucket created externally (e.g., through cloud CLI or other tools),
        specify ``source``.

        .. code-block:: yaml

          # Mount an existing S3 bucket
          file_mounts:
            /mydata:

>                 source: s3://my-bucket/ # or gs://, r2://, cos://<region>/<bucket>

Reviewer: In all 3 tabs, can we be consistent with style of inline comments (2 spaces before `#`).

                mode: MOUNT  # Optional - either MOUNT or COPY. Defaults to MOUNT.

        This will `mount <storage-mounting-modes_>`__ the contents of the bucket at ``s3://my-bucket/`` to the remote VM at ``/mydata``.

>     .. tab-item:: Upload files to new bucket

Reviewer 2: Does this mean we are not able to upload files to existing bucket? This might be unexpected, as in some of our users use case, they woud like to have all the data in a single bucket.

Author: I've reworded the titles and added a visually distinct`note` - does that help?

Reviewer 2: Ahh, I was wondering what will happen if the bucket already exists and was not created by SkyPilot. For example, there is a team writing files to the same bucket, and the bucket will only be `managed by SkyPilot` for one of the teammates.

Reviewer 2: Just a kind bump for this @romilbhardwaj : )

Author: Ahh thanks for the ping @Michaelvll, this had slipped through the cracks.

If the bucket was created by a team member, other members will have to use the `source: s3://...` pattern. 

We disallow `name: external-bucket` pattern from mounting external buckets because e.g., if I want to create a bucket and use the name of a pre-existing public (or private) bucket, these semantics will silently mount the bucket and my task will fail when it tries to write the desired path (or worse yet, overwrite unintended files).

This behavior manifested in our smoke tests too (and is now fixed in #2804). Our `test_using_file_mounts_with_env_vars` was silently re-mounting `skypilot-temp-gcs-test` bucket which was shared in our GCS account, instead of creating a new bucket at each test instance.

Reviewer 2: Thanks that makes sense! I found it a bit non-intuitive, for the following case, but I guess it is fine to leave it to the future.

If I am a member of a org, and created a bucket for with mount mode for storing some jupyter notebooks:
```
file_mounts:
  /dst:
    name: my-bucket
    store: s3
    mode: MOUNT
run: jupyter notebook /dst
```
The person then shares the YAML with another member in the org. Does this mean the other member running this yaml will fail and have to change it to:
```
file_mounts:
  /dst:
    source: s3://my-bucket
    mode: MOUNT
run: jupyter notebook /dst
```

        :sync: new-bucket-tab

        To create a new bucket, upload local files to this bucket and attach it to the task,
        specify ``name`` and ``source``, where ``source`` is a local path.

        .. code-block:: yaml

          # Create a new S3 bucket and upload local data
          file_mounts:
            /mydata:
                name: my-sky-bucket
                source: ~/dataset   # Optional - path to local data to upload to the bucket
                store: s3   # Optional - either of s3, gcs, r2, ibm
                mode: MOUNT  # Optional - either MOUNT or COPY. Defaults to MOUNT.

        SkyPilot will create a S3 bucket called ``my-sky-bucket`` and upload the
        contents of ``~/dataset`` to it. The bucket will then be mounted at ``/mydata``
        and your data will be available to the task.

        If the bucket already exists and was created by SkyPilot, SkyPilot will fetch
        and re-use the bucket.

        If ``store`` is omitted, SkyPilot will use the same cloud provider as the task's cloud.

>     .. tab-item:: Create empty bucket

Reviewer: 3rd tab says `Create empty bucket` and reading it, my confusion is “Ok I can do that at first sky launch; but what about subsequent launch? the bucket has been created, can I still reuse the YAML without any changes"?

Do we mean "Create or reuse" here? This is an important use case, e.g., used in https://skypilot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/spot-jobs.html#an-end-to-end-example.

Author: good point - I've updated the title and added a visually obvious `note` box to mention if the bucket exists and was created by SkyPilot, it will be reused. Does that help?

        :sync: empty-bucket-tab

>         To create an empty bucket, specify only the ``name`` and omit the ``source``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        To create an empty bucket, specify ``name`` (must be a unique name for the bucket).
```
or something like that. Point is to leave out "omit the source" since people may just click on this tab.

Author: added a note, does that help?

        .. code-block:: yaml

          # Create an empty gcs bucket
          file_mounts:
            /mydata:
                name: my-sky-bucket
                store: gcs   # Optional - either of s3, gcs, r2, ibm

        SkyPilot will create an empty GCS bucket called ``my-sky-bucket`` and mount it at ``/mydata``.
        This empty bucket can be used to write checkpoints, logs or other outputs directly to the cloud.

You can find more detailed usage examples in `storage_demo.yaml <https://github.com/skypilot-org/skypilot/blob/master/examples/storage_demo.yaml>`_.

.. _storage-mounting-modes:

> Mounting modes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Storage modes
```

--------------

A cloud storage can used in either :code:`MOUNT` mode or :code:`COPY` mode.

> 1. **MOUNT** mode: The object store is directly "mounted" to the remote VM. I.e., files are streamed when accessed by the task and all writes are replicated to remote bucket (and any other VMs mounting the same bucket). This is the default mode.

Reviewer: "The bucket" is more intuitive. "Object store" refers to the system (like S3).

> 1. **MOUNT** mode: The object store is directly "mounted" to the remote VM. I.e., files are streamed when accessed by the task and all writes are replicated to remote bucket (and any other VMs mounting the same bucket). This is the default mode.

Reviewer: We should mention "FUSE tools" somewhere on this page, maybe here.

> 2. **COPY** mode: The files are pre-fetched and cached on the local disk. Writing to object stores is not supported in this mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **COPY** mode: The files are pre-fetched and cached on the local disk. Writes only affect the local copy and are not streamed back to the bucket.
```

.. Source for the image: https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/1MPdVd2TFgAFOYSk6R6E903v1_C0LHmVU-ChIVwdX9A8/edit?usp=sharing

> .. image:: ../images/sky-storage-modes.png

Reviewer: This is excellent! Very clear. 

Some first impression confusion
- `my_data` -> `mydata` to be consistent with snippet above
- in the COPY mode box, the `open(..)` arrow should be two-directional to reflect writes can affect Local Path

    :width: 800
    :align: center
    :alt: sky-storage-modes

> Picking a mounting mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Picking a storage mode
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Choosing between :code:`MOUNT` and :code:`COPY` modes depends on the workload,
its performance requirements and size of the data.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * -

>      - .. centered:: :code:`mode: MOUNT`

Reviewer: This is not very intuitive to me wearing an AI engineer's hat.

I'd have expected the first row should mention example use cases (Checkpoints (read-write access) vs. Datasets (read-only access)). Performance / Disk Size should come last.

Author: moved the "best for" column to the top

     - .. centered:: :code:`mode: COPY`
   * - Performance
     - |:yellow_circle:| Slow to access files. Fast to provision.
     - |:white_check_mark:| Fast file access. Slow at initial provisioning.
   * - Writing to object stores
     - |:yellow_circle:| Most write operations [1]_ are supported.
     - |:x:| Read-only.

>    * - Disk Size

Reviewer 2: For the disk size of the mount mode, we may have a footnote saying a smaller disk size than the objects to read may cause performance degradation?

.. _sky-storage:

> Using Cloud Buckets

Author: `Cloud buckets` appears to be the more commonly used term:

<img width="1266" alt="image" src="https://github.com/skypilot-org/skypilot/assets/4416605/80165c7e-c15d-474f-9f22-51d37d6de968">

Changed to just `Cloud Buckets`.

        To create a new bucket, upload local files to this bucket and attach it to the task,
        specify ``name`` and ``source``, where ``source`` is a local path.

        .. code-block:: yaml

          # Create a new S3 bucket and upload local data
          file_mounts:
            /my_data:
              name: my-sky-bucket
              source: ~/dataset  # Optional - path to local data to upload to the bucket
              store: s3  # Optional - either of s3, gcs, r2, ibm
              mode: MOUNT  # Optional - either MOUNT or COPY. Defaults to MOUNT.

        SkyPilot will create a S3 bucket called ``my-sky-bucket`` and upload the
        contents of ``~/dataset`` to it. The bucket will then be mounted at ``/my_data``
        and your data will be available to the task.

        If ``store`` is omitted, SkyPilot will use the same cloud provider as the task's cloud.

        .. note::
            If the bucket already exists and was created by SkyPilot, SkyPilot will fetch
            and re-use the bucket. If any files at ``source`` have changed, SkyPilot will
            automatically sync the new files to the bucket at the start of the task.

>     .. tab-item:: Create (or re-use) a bucket

Reviewer: Several options

1. "Use an existing bucket" / "Create and reuse a bucket" ("_and_" should avoid the conflict?)
1. "Use an external bucket" / "Create and reuse a bucket" 
2. "Use an existing bucket" / "Create a bucket"

Slight preference for 1 & 2, since I think the "reuse" part may be common to warrant being in the tabs; that said,  3 is ok with me too if @romilbhardwaj and @Michaelvll agree :)

>     .. tab-item:: Create (or re-use) a bucket

Author: I'm fine with 2 or 3

>     .. tab-item:: Create (or re-use) a bucket

Reviewer 2: I would prefer 2 : )

    :width: 800
    :align: center
    :alt: sky-storage-modes

Picking a storage mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Choosing between :code:`MOUNT` and :code:`COPY` modes depends on the workload,
its performance requirements and size of the data.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * -
     - .. centered:: :code:`mode: MOUNT`
     - .. centered:: :code:`mode: COPY`
   * - Best for
     - Writing task outputs (e.g., checkpoints, logs), reading very large data that won't fit on disk.
     - High performance read-only access to datasets that fit on disk.
   * - Performance
     - |:yellow_circle:| Slow to access files. Fast to provision.
     - |:white_check_mark:| Fast file access. Slow at initial provisioning.
   * - Writing to buckets
     - |:yellow_circle:| Most write operations [1]_ are supported.
     - |:x:| Read-only.
   * - Disk Size
     - |:white_check_mark:| No disk size requirements [2]_ .
     - |:yellow_circle:| VM disk size must be greater than the size of the bucket.

.. [1] ``MOUNT`` mode does not support the full POSIX interface and some file
    operations may fail. Most notably, random writes and append operations are

>     not supported.

Author: Random writes will fail, appends IIRC fail on goofys (s3) and trigger a reupload on gcsfuse.

.. [2] Disk size smaller than the object size may cause performance degradation
    in ``MOUNT`` mode.

.. note::
    Under the hood, :code:`MOUNT` mode uses `FUSE <https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/next/filesystems/fuse.html>`_
    to provide a close-to-open consistency model for attached buckets. This means calling
    :code:`close()` on a file will upload the entire file to the bucket.
    Any subsequent reads, either using SkyPilot Storage or external utilities (such as
    aws/gsutil cli) will see the latest data.

.. note::
    SkyPilot does not guarantee preservation of file permissions when attaching
    buckets. You may need to set file permissions during task execution.

.. note::
    Symbolic links are handled differently in :code:`file_mounts` depending on whether buckets are used.
    For bucket mounts, symbolic links are not copied to remote.
    For local ``file_mounts`` that are directly rsynced to the VM,
    the symbolic links are directly copied, not their target data.
    The targets must be separately mounted or else the symlinks may break.

Common patterns
---------------

> Storing and sharing outputs of tasks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Storing task outputs
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can directly write the outputs of your tasks to a cloud bucket by creating
a new bucket and using it in :code:`MOUNT` mode.

**💡 Example use-case**: Writing model checkpoints, logs from training runs.

.. code-block:: yaml

  # Creates an empty bucket. Any writes to /my_data will be replicated to s3://my-sky-bucket
  file_mounts:
    /my_data:
        name: my-sky-bucket
        store: s3

Your task can then write files to :code:`/my_data` and they will be automatically
be uploaded to the cloud.

Avoid re-uploading data on every run
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Compared directly using local paths in file_mounts, uploading to a bucket can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compared to directly using local paths in file_mounts, uploading to a bucket can
```

> be faster since it is persistent and requires fewer uploads from your local
> machine if the data is not changing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be faster since it is persistent.
```
Even if data is changing, this format is supported, right? (Like the note suggests below)

Reviewer: Also, what's the reason this is faster vs. uploading to VMs? Is it persistent, or object storage having larger bandwidths than VMs.

**💡 Example use-case**: Uploading local dataset or files once and using it in multiple tasks.

.. code-block:: yaml

  # Creates a bucket and re-uses it in multiple tasks and runs
  file_mounts:
    /my_data:
        name: my-sky-bucket
        source: ~/my_local_path
        store: s3

.. note::
    If the data at source changes, new files will be automatically synced to the bucket.

Shared file system across workers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A bucket used in :code:`MOUNT` mode can act as a shared file system across
workers running on different nodes.

**💡 Example use-case**: `Inter-Process Communication (IPC) <https://github.com/skypilot-org/skypilot/blob/master/examples/storage/pingpong.yaml>`_, sharing data and outputs between workers.

.. code-block:: yaml

  num_nodes: 2

  # This bucket will be mounted at /my_data on both nodes.
  file_mounts:
    /my_data:
        name: my-sky-bucket
        store: s3

Using SkyPilot Storage CLI
--------------------------------

> To manage buckets created by SkyPilot, the sky CLI provides two useful commands -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To manage buckets created by SkyPilot, the sky CLI provides two useful commands:
```

:code:`sky storage ls` and :code:`sky storage delete`.

> 1.  :code:`sky storage ls` shows storage objects created by SkyPilot.

Reviewer: Replace "storage objects" with "buckets" in this section?

    aws/gsutil cli) will see the latest data.

.. note::
    SkyPilot does not guarantee preservation of file permissions when attaching
    object stores. You may need to set file permissions during task execution.

.. note::
    Symbolic links are handled differently in :code:`file_mounts` depending on whether object stores are used.
    For object store mounts, symbolic links are not copied to remote.
    For local ``file_mounts`` that are directly rsynced to the VM,
    the symbolic links are directly copied, not their target data.
    The targets must be separately mounted or else the symlinks may break.

> Common patterns

Reviewer 2: I guess it would be nice to mention the ML specific use case in each of the following pattern in this section, e.g., `Storing and sharing outputs of tasks (model checkpoints)`, `Avoid re-uploading data on every run (uploading and sharing artifacts for multiple runs)`, `Copying data from storage before job starts (Dataset)` etc.

Author: good idea - I've added a **💡 Example use-case** under each pattern. does that help?

---------------

> Storing and sharing outputs of tasks

Reviewer 2: Should we mention the mounting an existing bucket as well in the common pattern as well?

Author: Hmm that's covered in `Usage` at the top. Should we repeat it here?

Reviewer 2: Ahh, I see. It might be good to avoid the duplication.

Reviewer: +1, I think it's good to add a "Reading datasets" (from an existing bucket) here. Most orgs have such setups.

Common patterns
---------------

Reading datasets
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If your dataset is already in a cloud bucket, you can directly mount it to your
remote VM.

.. code-block:: yaml

  # Mount an existing S3 bucket containing a dataset
  file_mounts:
    /my_data:
      source: s3://my-dataset/
      mode: MOUNT

.. tip::
    If your dataset can fit on the VM's disk, you can use :code:`mode: COPY` to
    improve the I/O performance of your task. See :ref:`storage-mounting-modes` for more details.

> Storing task output
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Storing task outputs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```
